we're gonna get the show rolling now our
next speaker is somebody who who's
really really well-known on the speaker
circuit
he's a former FBI agent and he's one of
the leading experts in nonverbal
communication in the world he's
published over 11 he's purchased 11
books and he's uh he's going to
basically show us how the way we act our
nonverbal cues can affect the way people
communicate with us the way we present
ourselves is going to help you
understand other people's nonverbal cues
and how it all relates to community
right this is what we do like we talked
a lot about the theoretical stuff before
we talked a lot about the ways that we
can integrate into our business but this
section is all around how to build
engagement with people so we're going to
start with this talk which is very
hands-on it's about engaging people in
person we're going to go into a lot of
online engagement and understand a
little bit more of the practice of
building community and actually building
engagement for people so let's give a
big
cmx welcome to Joe Navarro
thank you for the for the kind
introduction
it's a it's hard to follow a break
because I know the break was a lot of
fun it's a David tell you it it took me
quite a bit to get here I was supposed
to be with cmx
earlier in the year and unfortunately we
had an illness but it's a pleasure to be
here in 1960 and this explains why I'm
in front of you something happens that
nobody expected
and that magical thing that happened
which explains why I'm here is that
there was a presidential debate and it
was the first televised debate and prior
to that debates had been covered by
newspapers or on the radio and for the
first time it was on television and
something weird happened weirder than
what we're seeing nowadays and the weird
thing that happened was those who
listened to it on the radio said Richard
Nixon won and those who saw it on
television said Kennedy won and not just
one but decisively and whoa you can't
have both how can you have one group who
listens to it say he won and the other
group who saw it say the other one won
and that difference was the nonverbal
communications now in 1960 that's what I
looked like and I was in Cuba and I was
actually that week getting my passport
picture because the Communists had taken
over things were getting nasty priests
were disappearing they had just closed
my school and my parents were thinking
we need to get out of here and at that
time the the word refugee wasn't a dirty
word like it is today so we were going
to take refuge somewhere
and that place was the United States now
I wanted to save people and be heroic
and so forth and well things didn't
quite turn out that way so I ended up
here in the States I learned English and
somehow I became an FBI agent and
there's some things that I learned along
the way both as a refugee and as an
observer of life and that's all I was I
was a paid observer and I want to share
these with you because as fascinating as
criminals were that were not nearly as
fascinating as these people that I
studied along the way and certainly in
the last 15 years in writing books that
I define is really being exceptional and
they're exceptional because of things
that are non verbals so I'd like to
cover that with you today and nonverbals
is very broad it's everything that
communicates but is not a word so this
room has its own message its own history
you have your own message that you
communicate if your mother didn't dress
you and you chose to dress yourself
today
you are communicating how you feel what
you think maybe where you're from we
communicate in all the things that we
attach ourselves to whether we use a
Montblanc pen or we use a big pen so
it's a very broad field and it's
interesting how many things that we
observe non-verbally you don't walk up
to somebody and say excuse me are you
honest nobody does that
and yet how do you let people in through
the front door somebody knocks on your
door who do you decide to talk to who do
you decide who you're going to lend
money to or assists or whatever and a
lot of the things that we do we do
non-verbally
because we have been for a very long
time every time you're at an ATM machine
and you're looking over your shoulder
you're non-verbally assessing is there a
threat to me is everything going to be
okay and this we do without really
thinking about it we look at this
individual and we say oh wait this
individual looks professional this is
what we call thin slice assessments
he looks competent he looks friendly now
it's possible he's not but at least on
the surface we're going to try it out
and then we look at this individual then
we say wow he looks competent but he
doesn't look as friendly one of them is
telling you you can talk to me for
several minutes one of them is saying
you can talk to me for several seconds
but one of the things I learned about
studying body language is the little
things and one of them you see here is
the thumb displays and I don't know if
you've ever seen thumb displays these
are high status displays you see them
with royalty in Europe you see them in
certain professions and I assure you
when your plumber is done he doesn't he
or she doesn't finish the job and go oh
hello this is a high status display as
our other thumb displays this was a
young child I began to observe these
things because I learned as an immigrant
actually as a refugee not an immigrant
that nonverbals were more truthful than
the verbals because people will say
things but they don't always mean them
but you can't really fake the nonverbals
and then I learned along the way that
there are some other things that were
troubling how many of you been told that
this behavior is not a good behavior to
do right right
there's a clinical term for that and I
hope David will forget
me but the term for that is crap that's
just sheer nonsense for in fact many of
you when we had the breakout we're doing
this and you were quite comfortable
weren't you it's a self hug it's just a
self hug it feels good
that's why we do it in public more so
than in private and so there's a lot of
junk up there about nonverbals and of
course there's the problem of sometimes
we don't see the nonverbals because what
we're busy with a device now I'm not
here to change the world I can't tell
you to stop using devices but I can tell
you this no matter how many devices we
have we as a species evolved to
communicate non-verbally a text will
never will never supplant a hug or a
kind smile or a head tilt it just won't
do it
now whether people will abide by that
that's not my responsibility but there
are some things that we can master here
today that you can take away today
because that's what David wanted give
them something they can use immediately
and that is focus on comfort and
discomfort just that comfort and
discomfort we're not here to learn about
deception we're not here about you know
power displays comfort discomfort if you
focus on that you'll be blessed from the
moment we're born we are doing pacifying
behaviors in fact we do pacifying
behaviors in utero just as other mammals
do elephants suck their trunk in utero
and if you've ever wondered why we bite
our lips smoke touch our faces do all
these things
these are pacifiers this is our body
saying chill relax calm down and we do
these things all day long yesterday I'm
watching the flights and there was two
canceled flights and people are standing
there
they're biting their lips and it dawned
on me people bite their lips and they
don't know why they but you know why we
bite our lips I'll tell you why because
you can't suck your thumb anymore
because at my age this looks bad I want
to but I can't and so we have all these
little behaviors repetitive behaviors
foot bouncing leg jiggling all these
little behaviors we dislike that are
repetitive we do to calm ourselves down
what do they reveal the revealing that
the brain is dealing with some sort of
stress so let's talk about the first
important one and the first one is i
blocking behavior right so when
something bothers us we cover our eyes
and say well wait a minute I cover my
eyes when something's yeah when
something bothers you how do we know
this because in 1974 I studied children
who were born blind they had never seen
and when they hear things they don't
like they don't cover their ears they
cover their eyes that means it's part of
our paleo circuits this is millions of
years old and so when we hear somebody
say something or you ask them something
and they go oh thank you for that
question and they're covering their eye
you know you know they didn't like that
question and then there's the nose right
we wrinkled our nose when we don't like
something and we do this all day long
whether we're reading a contract or
somebody suggesting you want to go to
this restin I don't think so but it's
interesting to see how often for
instance this betrays our negative
sentiments as do our lips you ever
wonder why when you're asked a question
you might go hmmm I don't know when you
purse your lips it's because it means
I'm thinking something alternatively or
I disagree Wow
can you imagine being in a discourse in
a conversation you're seeing this
behavior what a great opportunity to say
wait what do you think because I know
you're already disagreeing with me
instead of just talking we know that
when the lips disappear something's
wrong
which is why anytime you see somebody
testifying in Congress they have no lips
their lips are sucked out of their
mouths
they're gone lips gone issues any time
the lips narrow they're gone and then
there's the neck you ever wonder why we
touch the neck issues insecurities oh my
god there's that guy again oh he's gone
he's back and we cover this little area
called the suprasternal notch and we do
it because since the time of
australopithecines what has mankind
witnessed large felines large felines
and so we adopted these behaviors that
when there's a threat when there's
something negative we freeze we cover
our mouths or we cover our necks because
of large felines and we ventilate right
you ask somebody is that going to be
done by July and they go yeah no it's
not no it's not why do you know that
because they ventilated and we only
ventilate when something's wrong not
deception but something's wrong and you
know we do funny things with our hands
we rub our hands all day long when when
we're dealing with any kind of stress
you should be in the green room I'm
watching all the speakers before me and
they're all wringing their hands and I
was wringing my hands but there's one
behavior we do which is a reserved
behavior when you see somebody doing
this their fingers are interlaced
fingers are straight and they start
doing this something's really wrong
something is really wrong and yet how
many people miss this because we don't
take the time to learn the nonverbals
this is a reserved behavior and then
there's behaviors that potentiate our
messages if you ever wonder why people
steeple this is called the steeple let's
all do it together put your fingers
together it won't hurt separate your
fingers right wide and high don't arch
them there you go the only behavior
the only behavior on this planet that
says I'm confident no no it's true and
how do we know this because when we look
at blind children they do this behavior
to other blind children which means that
they've learned to perform it and
they're receptive to getting that
message so when you have something
important to communicate don't sit on
your hands don't put them in your
pockets steeple there's a purpose for it
it potentiates your message don't do it
weekly don't do it under the table do it
high do it high and the feet I talk
about the feet because the feet are the
most honest part of your body most
people don't know that you see our faces
have by social convention contracts you
smile I smile but our feet don't have a
contract with anyone if you see a threat
your feet turn away if you have to go
David was up there with me and he had to
leave and immediately one of the feet
oriented I know I Drive people crazy
I knew he had to go so why stop him
that's called social intelligence and in
the last few minutes that I have I want
to talk about something else that has to
do with non verbals and that is
influence because we influence each
other primarily not with word
not with words nobody's that clever we
influence each other
non-verbally we think of houses as
having a curbside appeal but the
question I always ask is what is your
curbside appeal what would drive me to
you are you clever are you smart are you
funny are you interesting do you have a
great story did you read a great book or
is it time to repaint the house cut the
grass and change the shrubbery and I say
that because I'm old enough to know and
have talked to people who haven't
changed in 15 years and then they wonder
why they're stalled and I say have you
changed your curbside appeal read a book
I love this photograph because when I
look at it I see serenity and we are
drawn to things that are serene the
human brain dislikes this harmony we
like things and we like individuals that
make us feel good I love this photograph
for that we like this guy even though
he's the same as I don't know how that
picture got switched with that one
but look at it for a second why are we
drawn to one and not drawn to the other
one and here's the message clothing does
matter oh yes but it does oh but it does
look at the research now I realize that
I'm the one that's overdressed here and
maybe I need to apologize but that's the
way I feel comfortable but don't ever
ignore the fact that how we appear
matters because the research shows that
at six months
we already prefer at six months of age a
baby
we already prefer beauty at six months
we like smiles but we like head-tilt
better I loved when I was watching all
of you and so many of you had your head
tilted head tilt means I'm receptive to
you can you imagine as a child your
parent always addresses you like a drill
sergeant hi how are you nice to see you
have a good day versus hi because at
four weeks a baby recognizes head tilt
and if you don't believe me borrow
somebody's child
god it's excuse me that bloke says that
head tilt and watch how the baby smiles
and we humans smile when we see head
tilt
it means we're receptive and we love
great attitude you know what we hate bad
attitude how many of you know somebody
that has a bad attitude and they still
breathe
you're always going to be around people
with bad attitude but we gravitate
towards people with great attitude and
that's really who we want to work with
and associate with and here this
princess is doing what we call a gravity
defying behavior she's arching her
eyebrows right when you say hi to
somebody and you divide that defy
gravity you go hey how are you
versus how you doing which one do you
like better do you like the one with the
the animation with the arching of the
eyebrows or do you like the how you
doing
nobody likes the other one and that's
because you're burning blood Sugar's
you're burning you're actually creating
doing something energetic that says I
care about you because when I don't I
won't lift a finger
literally and so just with the arching
of an eyebrow when you see somebody
you'll be perceived as more kind and to
want to be with you you know oftentimes
when I was speaking with Tim oftentimes
we set the wrong goal we set the goal as
I want to achieve this when the goal is
I want to have more face time think
about it the difference when I came into
the FBI they said well well you got to
get a confession i reframed it I want to
have face time with this person if I
have face time they'll tell me whatever
I want to know why because they want to
spend time with me and that's what I did
if your goal is I want to sell this or I
want to achieve that maybe you should
reframe it and say how do I achieve more
face time to do that you've got to do
everything I've talked about so far
that's what you don't want to do you
don't want to look like that we want to
listen we want to listen for the words
that are used because not all words have
the same weight
my generation use problems your
generation says issues it doesn't
resonate with me
if I say mom and dad don't say family
you need to listen because words have
different weight and people will front
that which is important and they will
use weighted words with you but we also
have to be curious you want people to
spend time with you be curious benign ly
curious they'll gravitate to you they'll
spend time with you they want to know
more about you just by asking them
questions really where you from oh my
god what was that growing up like
whatever because we humans seek to
communicate and when people are curious
they gravitate towards us and we want a
mirror non-verbally if you're relaxed
I'm relaxed if you're stressed I want to
help you to deal with that stress I want
to mirror your words so that we are in
synchrony how many of you have had a bad
handshake right it's like how can you
screw that up right you've had the
jujitsu you've had the wet fish right go
ahead and do it good for me yeah there
you go
I've had everything I've had the probe
I've had the one where the index finger
is halfway up my arm and and I didn't
know index fingers were that long first
of all and secondly are we engaged or
you know I said how can you screw up a
handshake but here's what's important we
remember negative things for about 13
years it goes to that part of the brain
that reminds us that we don't can't
touch a hot stove every day and that's
why it sticks with us so long so the
first time we touch get it right because
when you get it wrong just tell yourself
I'm going to remember it for 13 years
yuck simple things like even how we
point right everybody point at me
oh this is what it looks like do you
like it no this is what it should look
like let's all do it together ah it's
like I want to be with you
everybody point to the wall just do it
again it won't hurt you
there you go now with your finger like
this like piss Simon Says why because
the brain is prepared to accept this far
better than this
that's how sensitive our brains are to
nonverbals and yet how many people we
see say why don't you take a seat right
there and right away
we hate that take care of the little
things because the broken windows when
you show you don't care other people
will not care that's in your home and at
business you see garbage outside people
who will dump garbage they see you
picking up the garbage
they'll pick it up they see you cleaning
up your language they will clean up
their language you stop wearing torn
jeans they'll wear nice jeans you stop
dropping f-bombs they will stop dropping
f-bombs but the minute you don't care
other people won't care how many of you
do presentations
always be framed by blue there is no
other color to be framed I and that's
why you see what you see always be
framed by blue the research is ample I
don't have time to explain it all what
happened oh yeah
that's the head of Xerox simplicity
humans like things simplified they'll
make it complex the simpler the better
just when you write it if there's one
thing I've learned after eleven and a
half books is you simplify simplify
simplify write it edit it write it
edited cut it down does anybody know who
Edward ever it is nobody does and he was
the most gifted speaker of his day the
reason nobody knows who he is and they
should because he was the president of
Harvard and was paid to go give the most
momentous speech of the day which was at
the Gettysburg Address but his problem
is he spoke for two hours and 30 minutes
but then he was followed by this guy who
basically tweeted Abraham Lincoln gave
the first tweet he spoke for two minutes
26 seconds he spoke so fast they
couldn't set up the cameras in time but
it's his speech we remember because of
its brevity and its simplicity next time
you think you're clever remind yourself
we are not keep it short nobody
remembers that two hour and 20 minute
speech not one word of it no we're
nobody but we remember four score and
seven years ago
humility is huge and we all need a
little humility check every once in a
while
every one of us every once once every
once in a while you need to take a step
back and say do I need a little bit of
humility go to that humility bottle in
the wherever you've parked it take it
out and take a little you know
tablespoon of it because we all need a
little bit of humility and we all need
empathy and empathy is tactile and its
present remember this empathy is not
over the Internet that's communication
empathy is tactile and it is present and
it is powerful I still remember the day
when Princess Diana picked up a baby
that had AIDS and the world changed the
world's perception of AIDS changed
because oh my god she touched a baby
that had AIDS and like oh now it's okay
even doctors took off their masks
empathy folks is powerful and I've
learned some things along the way
because of our situation in my life
because when we came here we were very
poor very poor and we didn't speak the
language but I learned that there's five
things that differentiates the average
from the exceptional not the average
from the good and not the average from
the great the average from the
exceptional and I want to share this
with you because I found these while
doing my research and the first thing is
we must to be exceptional we must have
mastery over ourselves
if you read the front page of a
newspaper every time you read about
somebody going off to jail or having a
breakdown or this or that they have not
had mastery over themselves you cannot
achieve great things if you don't master
yourself if you can't focus and if you
can't just plow through whatever life
throws at you and believe me my family
had many things thrown at them
you can't build a violin if you don't
pay the price and the second thing is to
be exceptional you have to be a good
observer we are taught to look but we're
not taught to observe most of us don't
know what to look for
we're not taught to observe and yet we
know exceptional people are great
observers they see what your needs wants
and desires are so they can act on them
and observing is not looking an
exceptional people communicate both
verbally and non-verbally verbally and
non-verbally not just verbally and they
do it effectively with a purpose
effectively with a purpose think about
it what if you were to bring together
these two powerful forces of
communication both the verbal and the
nonverbal exceptional people act they're
known by their actions not their words
they act immediately and they act
ethically and they do it to accomplish
whatever is needed at that moment
they're undeterred I was in Washington
DC when a plane hit up a bridge and I
saw one of my fellow Bureau agents jump
in the water it was three degrees he can
sit there and have a debate he didn't
wander here should I jumped in is it a
'they know you do what you have to do
exceptional people Act they get up and
they meet you and they comfort you want
people to come to you to spend time with
you to gravitate to you provide
psychological comfort that's all we want
we actually don't want perfection we
humans don't look for perfection we look
for psychological comfort
there's a great picture on the internet
I wish I'd brought it and there's a
little puppy and there's a chicken hand
right on top of it providing it warmth I
tweeted about it I said love doesn't
have to be perfect it just has to be
good enough and you know what
psychological comfort is that what does
this person need in the moment five
things five things that I learned from
my family this is right before right
when we arrived from from Cuba but the
most powerful thing I think I learned
and I'll leave you with this message
because we really don't have much time
is this it doesn't matter what you own
it doesn't matter what you make it
really doesn't and it doesn't impress me
at all did one thing that I've learned
the only thing that matters is how you
treat those who can do absolutely
nothing for you have a good day
you